---
aliases:
  - "[[Definition and Elementary Properties of Groups]]"
  - "[[Subgroups]]"
---
### Definitions and Elements

In this note, we shall be investigating with great detail a special type of group, called the *cyclic groups*. Intuitivley speaking, as the name suggests, this type of groups cycles through its elements. 

>[!d] Cyclic Groups
>A Group $G$ is *cyclic* if there exists $x \in G$ such that for any $g \in G$, $g = x^i$ for some $i \in \mathbb{Z}$. In other words, a cyclic group $G$ is **generated by a single element $x$** so the group can also be written as: 
>$$
>G = \langle x \rangle = \{ x^i : i \in \mathbb{Z}\}
>$$
>where $x$ is called the *generator* of $G$.

Here are some elementary examples of cyclic groups: 

>[!example] Examples of Cyclic Groups
>1. Consider the subgroup of the [[The Dihedral Group|dihedral group]] $D_{2n}$ consisting of all rotations. This group is cyclic as it can be written as $\{ r^i : i \in \mathbb{Z}\}$, so the generator of the group is $r$ and the order of the group is simply $n$. Notice that the order of the group in this case is **equal to the order of the generator**. 
>2. The additive group of the integers $\mathbb{Z}$ is also a cyclic group since every element $n$ in $\mathbb{Z}$ can be written as a sum of $n$ $1$'s, so $1$ is a generator of $\mathbb{Z}$. In this case, the order of the group is said to be $\infty$ because the order of the generator $1$ is infinity as well. 
>3. Consider the group $\mathbb{Z} / n\mathbb{Z}$ under addition. This is a cyclic group of order $n$ with the generator being $[1]$. 

Our first proposition of this Note expresses all elements in a cyclic group using its generator:

>[!success] Elements of a Cyclic Group
>If $G = \langle x \rangle$, then $|G| = o(x)$ and more specifically: 
>1. If $|G| < \infty$, then the elements of $G$ are precisely $e, x, x^2, ..., x^{n-1}$, which are all distinct elements of $G$. 
>2. If $|G| = \infty$, then $x^a \neq x^b$ whenever $a \neq b$, so the elements of the infinite list $e, x, x^2, ...$ are all the distinct elements in $G$. 

**Proof**: We first prove the statement in the case where $o(x) = n < \infty$. Suppose $x^a = x^b$ for $0 \leq a < b \leq n-1$, then $x^{b-a} = e$ where $b-a < n$. This contradicts the minimality of order, so we must have that all elements of the list $e, x, x^2, ..., x^{n-1}$ are distinct. Next, we show that these are all the elements in $G$. Recall that $G = \{x^i : i \in \mathbb{Z}\}$. For any $x^i \in G$, we can perform division algorithm on $i$ and $n$, which guarantees the existence of $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $0 \leq r < n$ and:
$$
i = qn + r \implies x^i = (x^n)^{q}x^r = x^r
$$
As $x^r \in \{e, x, ..., x^{n-1}\}$, we have shown that every element in $G$ must be equivalent to some element in the list, which completes the proof that $G = \{e, x, ..., x^{n-1}\}$. In the case where $o(x) = \infty$, we must have that $x^n \neq e$ whenever $n \neq 0$. Suppose FTSOC that $x^a = x^b$ for some $a \neq b$, then $x^{a-b} = e$ but $a - b \neq 0$, which is a contradiction. Hence, $x^a \neq x^b$ whenever $a \neq b$, which shows that the infinite list $\{e, x, x^2...\}$ are all the distinct elements of $G$, completing the proof. 

>[!warning] Remark
>Notice the usage of the **minimality of order** to achieve a contradiction in this proof. This is a crucial method in proving statements about order and cyclic groups. 

### Chracterizing Cyclic Groups

The main aim of this section is to show that there are **exactly one cyclic group of a particular order**, which can be seen as a characterization theorem for Cyclic Groups. In other words, the structure of a cyclic group is **only dependent on its order** and is **independent of its elements**. First, we need an important lemma: 

>[!success] Lemma: Order of Elements in a Cyclic Group
>Let $G$ be a cyclic group and let $x \in G$. If $x^m = x^n = e$ for $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$, then $x^d = e$ where $d = (m, n)$. In particular, if $x^n = e$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}$,  then $o(x) \mid n$. 

**Proof**: By Bezout's Lemma, there exist $i ,j \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $d = mi+nj$, then:
$$
x^d = x^{mi + nj} = (x^m)^i(x^n)^j = e
$$
To prove the second assertion, assume FTSOC that $(o(x), n)=d < p(x)$. As $x^{o(x)} = x^n = e$, by the previous statement, $x^d = e$, which contradicts the minimality of order. Hence, $d = o(x)$, which implies that $o(x) \mid n$, completing the proof. 

>[!success] Isomorphism Theorem of Cyclic Groups
>Any two cyclic groups of the same order are [[Homomorphisms and Isomorphisms|isomorphic]]. Specifically: 
>1. if $n \in \mathbb{Z}^+$ and $\langle x \rangle$, $\langle y \rangle$ are two cyclic groups of order $n$, then the map $\varphi: \langle x \rangle \to \langle y \rangle$ defined by: $$ \varphi(x^k) = y^k $$for all $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ is an isomorphism. 
>2. If $\langle x \rangle$ is an infinite cyclic group, then the map $\varphi: \mathbb{Z} \to \langle x \rangle$ defined by $$ \varphi(k) = x^k $$for all $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ is an isomorphism. 

**Proof**: We prove the finite case first. We need to show that $\varphi$ is a well-defined map, This is equivalent to showin that whenever $x^r = x^s$, then $\varphi(x^r) = \varphi(x^s) \iff y^r = y^s$. Suppose $x^r = x^s$, then $x^{r-s} = e$, which, by the previous lemma, implies that $n \mid r-s$. Hence, there exists $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $nk = r-s$. Consequently, 
$$
y^{r-s} = (y^n)^k = e \implies y^r = y^s
$$
which proves that the map is well-defined. This map is obviously bijective as the function that maps $y^k$ to $x^k$ is the two-sided inverse of $\varphi$. Now, it is only left for us to show that $\varphi$ is a homomorphism. This is trivial since: 
$$
\begin{align}
\varphi(x^rx^s) &= \varphi(x^{r+s}) \\
&= y^{r+s} \\
&= y^ry^s \\
&= \varphi(x^r)\varphi(x^s)
\end{align}
$$
Hence, $\varphi$ is a well-defined Isomorphism, and as a result, $\langle x \rangle \simeq \langle y \rangle$. 

(Proof Cont.) In the case with infinite cyclic groups, we donnot need to verify that the map is well-defined since all elements in $\mathbb{Z}$ are distinct and we donnot need to worry about different representatives for the same element. Notice that the function that maps $x^k$ to $k$ is a two-sided inverse for $\varphi$ and that $\varphi(rs) = x^{r+s} = x^rx^s = \varphi(r)\varphi(s)$, so $\varphi$ is a homomorphism. As a result, $\varphi$ is a homomorphism between $\mathbb{Z}$ and $\langle x \rangle$, so $\mathbb{Z} \simeq \langle x \rangle$.  

This theorem is important as it asserts that there exists only **one cyclic group of order $n$** for a fixed $n \in \mathbb{Z}^+$. We shall refer to this cyclic group as $Z_n$.  

### Generators of Cyclic Groups

The following theorem allows the computation of the order of every element in a cyclic group: 

>[!success] Order of Elements in a Cyclic Group
>Let $G = \langle x \rangle$ and let $a \in \mathbb{Z} -\{ 0\}$, then: 
>1. If $o(x) = \infty$, then $o(x^a) = \infty$. 
>2. If $o(x) = n$, then $$o(x^a) = \frac{n}{(n, a)}$$ where $(a, n)$ is the greatest common divisor of $a$ and $n$. 
>3. In particular, if $o(x) = n$ and $a \mid n$, then $o(x^a) = n / a$. 

**Proof**: In the case where $x$ has infinite order, suppose FTSOC that $o(x^a) = k$, then $x^{ak} = e$, which implies that $o(x) \mid ak$, which is contradiction. Hence, every element in an infinite cyclic group must have infinite order. If $o(x)$ is finite, let $o(x^a) = k$, then $x^{ak} = e$. Consequently: 
$$
n \mid ak \implies \frac{n}{(a, n)} \mid k\frac{a}{(a, n)} 
$$
As $a/ (a, n)$ and $n / (a, n)$ are coprime, by Euclid's Lemma, $n / (a, n) \mid k$. On the other hand, as $(a, n) \mid a$, there exists $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $(a, n)k = a$, which implies that:
$$
(x^a)^{n/(a, n)} = x^{an/(a, n)} = x^{kn} = (x^n)^k = e
$$
Consequently, $k \mid n/(a, n)$. Resultingly, we must have $o(x^a) = k = n/(a, n)$. As a special case, when $a \mid n$, $(a, n) = a$, so
$$
o(x^a) = \frac{n}{a}
$$
which completes the proof. 

Notice that for $x^a \in \langle x \rangle$ to be a generator, $o(x^a) = o(x)$, so the above proposition can further determine which elements in a cyclic group are generators: 

>[!important] Corollary: Generators of a Cyclic Group
>Let $G = \langle x \rangle$ be a finite cyclic group of order $n$, then $x^a \in G$ is a generator if and only if $(a, n) = 1$. 

**Proof**: $x^a$ is a generator if and only if $o(x^a) = n$. Using the previous proposition, this is equivalent to:
$$
o(x^n) = \frac{n}{(a, n)} = n \implies (a, n) = 1 
$$
which completes the proof. 

We can use this corollary to find the set of all generators in $\mathbb{Z} / n\mathbb{Z}$: 

>[!example] Generators of $\mathbb{Z} / n\mathbb{Z}$:
>Notice that $[1]$ is a generator of $\mathbb{Z} / n\mathbb{Z}$, so $[k] \in \mathbb{Z} / n\mathbb{Z}$ can be seen as the $k$th "power" of $[1]$. Naturally, by the formula for order: 
>$$
>o([k]) = \frac{n}{(n, k)}
>$$ 
>By the Corollary, we can hence deduce that $[k]$ is a generator of $\mathbb{Z} / n\mathbb{Z}$ if and only if $(k, n) = 1$. 

### Subgroup Structure of Cyclic Groups

>[!success] All subgroups of Cyclic Groups are cyclic. 
>Every subgroup of a Cyclic Group $G = \langle x \rangle$ is cyclic. Specifcally, if $K \leq G$, then $K = \{e\}$ or $K = \langle x^d \rangle$ where $d$ is the smallest positive integer such that $x^d \in K$. 

**Proof**: Suppose that $K \neq \{e\}$, then there exists $x^k \in K$ where $k \in \mathbb{Z}$. As $K$ is a subgroup, it is closed under inverses, so $x^{-k} \in K$. Since one of $k$ and $-k$ must be positive, the set: 
$$
S = \{ k \in \mathbb{N} : x^k \in K\}
$$
is non-empty. By WOP, there exists a least element $d \in S$. We claim that $x^d$ generates $K$. For any $x^a \in K$, we can perform division algorithm on $a$ and $d$ to assert the existence of $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ where $0 \leq r < d$ and:
$$
a = qd + r
$$
Notice that this implies: 
$$
x^r = x^ax^{-qd} = x^a (x^d)^{-q} \in K
$$
If $r \neq 0$, then this contradicts the minimality of $d$, so we must have $r = 0$. Thus, $a = qd$ and consequently, $x^a = (x^d)^q$. As a result, $K = \langle x^d \rangle$, which completes the proof. 

>[!warning] Remark
>This proof is classic in its use of minimality and the division algorithm. The same method can be used to prove that the subgroups of $\mathbb{Z}$ consists exactly of $n\mathbb{Z}$ (multiples of $n$) for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$. 

The following two theorems reveal the full subgroup structure for infinite and finite cyclic groups: 

>[!success] Subgroup Structure for Infinite Cyclic Groups
>Let $G = \langle x \rangle$. If $|G| = \infty$, then for any distinct nonnegative integers $a, b$, $\langle x^a \rangle \neq \langle x^b \rangle$ and for any $m \in \mathbb{Z}$, $\langle x^m \rangle = \langle x^{|m|} \rangle$. This shows that the non-trivial subgroups of $G$ correspond bijectively to the positive integers. 

**Proof**: If $b \mid a$, then $x^a \not \in \langle x^b \rangle$ and vice versa. If $a \nmid b$ and $b \nmid a$, then $x^a \not \in \langle x^b \rangle$ as well. Thus, in all cases, $\langle x^b \rangle \neq \langle x^a \rangle$. For any $m \in \mathbb{Z}$, if $m > 0$, then naturally $\langle x^m \rangle = \langle x^{|m|} \rangle$. If $m < 0$, then $|m| = -m$. For any $(x^m)^a \in \langle x^m \rangle$, it can be expressed as $(x^{-m})^{-a} \in \langle x^{-m} \rangle$, so $\langle x^m \rangle \subseteq \langle x^{-m} \rangle$ and likewise we can prove the opposite inclusion. Hence, $\langle x^m \rangle = \langle x^{|m|} \rangle$ for all $m \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

>[!success] Subgroup Structure for Finite Cyclic Groups
>Let $G = \langle x \rangle$. If $|G| = n$, then for any positive divisor $a$ of $n$, there exists a unique subgroup of order $a$. This subgroup is $\langle x^d \rangle$ where $d = n/a$. Morover, for any $m \in \mathbb{Z}$, $\langle x^m \rangle = \langle x^{(m, n)} \rangle$. This shows that the non-trivial subgroups of $G$ correspond bijectively to the positive divisors of $n$. 

**Proof**: Notice that by the "Order of Elements in a Cyclic Group" in the previous section, the cyclic group generated by $x^d$ has order $a$ provided that $a = n/d \implies d = n/a$. This proves the existence. To prove uniqueness, suppose that there exists a subgroup $K$ such that $|K| = a$. As $K \leq G$, $K$ is cyclic. Assume that $K = \langle x^b \rangle$, we aim to prove that $K = \langle x^d \rangle$. Notice that:
$$
\frac{n}{(n, b)} = |K| = a = |\langle x^d \rangle| = \frac{n}{d}
$$
Hence, we must  have that $(n, b) = d$, so $d \mid b$. Consuently, $\langle x^b \rangle \leq \langle x^d \rangle$. Moreover, as the two groups have the same order, we can deduce that $\langle x^b \rangle = \langle x^d \rangle$, which completes the proof for uniqueness. To prove that for all $m \in \mathbb{Z}$, $m \in \mathbb{Z}$, $\langle x^m \rangle = \langle x^{(m, n)} \rangle$, notice that both groups have the same order of $n / (m, n)$, which, as we've just prove, implies that the two groups are the same. As $(m, n) \mid n$, we can conclude that the subgroups of a finite cyclic group of order $n$ correspond exactly the cyclic groups with orders dividing $n$. 

>[!warning] Remark
>In the proof of this final theorem, we used the fact that if a finite group is a subgroup of another finite group, and the two groups have the same order, then they must be the same group. This technique is important in proving equivalence of groups and occurs in various other places. 