---
aliases:
  - "[[Quotient Groups]]"
  - "[[Lagrange's Theorem and Products of Groups]]"
---
### Finite Abelian Groups and Simple Groups

We first prove an important proposition about Finite Abelian Groups that is a weakened version of [[Theorem of Cauchy|Cauchy's Theorem]]. The proof of the proposition illustrates the power of induction in finite group theory: 

>[!success] Cauchy's Theorem for Finite Abelian Groups
>If $G$ is a finite abelian group and $p$ is a prime dividing $|G|$, then $G$ contains an element of order $p$. 

**Proof**: We proceed by induction on the order of $G$. In the base case, the proposition is obviously true for the trivial group $\{e\}$. Suppose that for all positive integers $k < n$, any group with order $k$ satisfies the proposition, we want to prove that any group of order $n$ satisfies the proposition. If $G$ is [[Cyclic Groups|cyclic]], then we are done, as the subgroups of a cyclic group corresponds bijectively to the factors of $|G|$. If $G$ is not cyclic, then there exists an element $x \in G$ such that $o(x) < |G|$. Then, as $G$ is an abelian group, $\langle x \rangle \unlhd G$. Since $|\langle x \rangle| < |G|$, we can use the inductive hypothesis to deduce that for every prime dividing $o(x)$, there is a corresponding subgroup of the desired order in $\langle x \rangle$. If $p \nmid o(x)$, then we can consider the quotient group $G / \langle x \rangle$. As $|G / \langle x \rangle| = G / o(x)$, $p$ must divide $|G / \langle x \rangle|$. By the inductive hypothesis, we can again deduce that there exists a subgroup of order $p$ in $G/\langle x \rangle$. Hence, there exists $g\langle x\rangle \in G / \langle x \rangle$ such that $o(g\langle x \rangle) = p$. This implies that $g^p \in \langle x \rangle$, and that $p \mid o(g)$ which again implies the existence of a cyclic group of order $p$ in $G$. This completes the proof. 

This is an elegant proof and illustrates some important ideas in finite group theory. 

>[!abstract] Key Ideas
>1. we can see the idea of **piecing together information about a normal subgroup and its quotient group to obtain information about our original group**. Since both the subgroup and the quotient group has order less than the original group. we can use the inductive hypothesis to obtain their information. We will see this idea again in the second part of the *Hölder Program*. 
>2. The reason why this argument works so well is based on the fact that $G$ is **finite and abelian**, so every subgroup of $G$ is normal and we can utilise the quotient group nicely in our proof. However, in most groups, we don't have such strong properties, which makes things more difficult when we want to prove statement about any aribtrary group. 

On the other end of the spectrum, opposing finite abelian groups, we have the *simple groups*: 

>[!d] Simple Groups
>A group $G$ is *simple* if $|G| > 1$ and the only normal subgroups of $G$ are $\{e\}$ and $G$. 

In other words, a simple group has no proper normal subgroups other than the trivial group, which is the exact contrary of finite abelian groups. For this reason, the number of differen "types" of finite abelian groups that are simple are in fact greatly limited. In the following proposition, we prove the even stronger assertion that there is only one kind of simple abelian groups, i.e. $Z_p$: 

>[!success] Characterization of Simple Abelian Groups
>Let $G$ be a group. If $G$ is simple and abelian, then $G \simeq Z_p$ for some prime $p \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

**Proof**: We first show that any abelian simple group must be cyclic. To see this, notice that the subgroup generated by any non-identity element in $G$ must equal as otherwise, $G$ would contain a proper subgroup, which is a normal subgroup given that $G$ is abelian, resulting in a contradiction. Hence, $G$ must be generated by a single element and is hence cyclic. Now, if $G$ is infinite, then $G \simeq \mathbb{Z}$, and $G$ must contain proper non-trivial subgroups. Therefore, $G$ cannot be infinite. When $G$ is finite, the only possibility is that $|G| = p$, where $p$ is a prime in $\mathbb{Z}$ since otherwise, $G$'s subgroups correspond bijectively to the non-trivial factors of $|G|$, which again indicates that $G$ is not simple. As a result, we can conclude that: 
$$
G \simeq Z_p
$$
for some prime $p$. 

>[!warning] Note
>Notice that in the proof of the above proposition, we have also shown that there exists no infinite abelian groups that are finite, as they must be [[Homomorphisms and Isomorphisms|Isomorphic]] to $\mathbb{Z}$. 

### Jordan-Hölder Theorem and the Hölder Program

Due to the fact that Simple groups cannot be factored into Quotient Groups, they are **analogous to the primes** in $\mathbb{Z}$, and just like the Unique Factorization Theorem in $\mathbb{Z}$, we can "factor" any group uniquely into simple groups in the form of *composition series*: 

>[!d] Composition Series
>In a group $G$, a *chain* of subgroups:
>$$
>1 = N_0 \unlhd N_1 \unlhd N_2 \unlhd ... \unlhd N_{k-1} \unlhd N_k = G
>$$
>is called a *composition series* if and only $N_{i+1} / N_i$ is a simple group for all $0 \leq i \leq k-1$. In this case, the quotient groups $N_{i+1} / N_i$ are called *composition factors* of $G$. 

>[!warning] Note
>It is important to remember that normality of a subgroup is **not transitive**, in other words, $N_1 \unlhd N_2$ and $N_2 \unlhd N_3$ does not imply that $N_1 \unlhd N_3$. 

The "Unique factorization Theorem" of Groups is called the *Jordan-Hölder Theorem*, as stated below: 

>[!success] Jordan-Hölder Theorem
>Let $G$ be a finite group with $G \neq \{e\}$, then the composition factors in a composition series are unique, i.e., if $$1 = N_0 \unlhd N_1 \unlhd N_2 \unlhd ... \unlhd N_{r-1} \unlhd N_r = G$$ and $$1 = M_0 \unlhd M_1 \unlhd M_2 \unlhd ... \unlhd M_{s-1} \unlhd M_s = G$$ are two composition series, then $r = s$ and there exists a permutation $\pi$ of $\{1, 2, ..., r\}$ such that:
>$$
>M_{\pi(i)} / M_{\pi(i)-1} \simeq N_i / N_{i-1}
>$$
>for all $1 \leq i \leq r$. 

To prove this theorem, we need some lemmas first. The first lemma asserts that every group has at least one composition series: 

>[!success] Lemma 1: Existence of Composition Series
>Le $G$ be a finite group, then $G$ has a composition Series. 

**Proof**: We proceed with proof by induction on the order of $G$. In the base case, we have $|G| = 1$, which implies that $G = \{e\}$, and the proposition is trivially true. Suppose that for a fixed $n$, all groups with order less than $n$ has a composition series, we now show that all groups $G$ with order $n$ has a composition series. If $G$ is simple, then $G$ has the trivial composition series, i.e. $\{e\} \unlhd G$. If $G$ is not simple, then $G$ contains a proper, nontrivial normal subgroup $H$. If $G / H$ is simple, then we can use the inductive hypothesis on $H$ to conclude that: 
$$
1 \unlhd H_1 \unlhd H_2 \unlhd ... \unlhd H \unlhd G
$$
is a composition series of $G$, wherein $1 \unlhd H_1 \unlhd H_2 \unlhd ... \unlhd H$ is a composition series of $H$. If $G/H$ is not simple, then there exists a non-trivial $A/H \unlhd G/H$ where $H \leq A$. By the [[Isomorphism Theorems|Fourth Isomorphism Theorem]], we have that $A \unlhd G$. We can apply the above procedure again to produce a composition series for $G$, and this process eventually ends due to the finiteness of $G$. Therefore, by the Principle of Mathematical Induction, we conclude that $G$ must have a composition series. 

The next lemma asserts that every normal subgroup must be part of a composition series: 

>[!success] Lemma 2: Normal Subgroups and Composition Series
>If $G$ is a finite group and $H \unlhd G$, then there is a composition series of $G$, one of whose terms is $H$. 

**Proof**: By the previous lemma, we can find a composition series of $H$: 
$$
1 \unlhd H_1 \unlhd H_2 \unlhd ... \unlhd H
$$
If $G/H$ is simple, then we are done as $1 \unlhd H_1 \unlhd H_2 \unlhd ... \unlhd H \unlhd G$ is the desired composition series. If $G/H$ is not simple, there exists a minimal $N_1 \unlhd G$ such that $N_1/H \unlhd G/H$ and $N_1 / H$ is a simple group. Then, we can repeat the procedure again for $N_1$ and the entire process must end due to the finiteness of $G$. Therefore, eventually, we would have that:
$$
1 \unlhd H_1 \unlhd H_2 \unlhd ... \unlhd H \unlhd N_1 \unlhd... \unlhd H_k \unlhd G
$$
is a desired composition series. 

With the above two lemmas, we are now ready to prove the *Jordan-Hölder Theorem*: 

**Proof of Jordan-Hölder**: Again, we proceed by induction on $\min(r, s)$. In the base case, we have $\min(r,s) = 1$ and WLOG we assume that $s = 1$. Suppose $G$ has two composition series:
$$
1 = N_0 \unlhd N_1 \unlhd ... \unlhd N_r = G
$$
and
$$
1 = M_0 \unlhd M_1 \unlhd M_2 = G
$$
It suffices to prove that $r = 2$ and that the list of coposition factors is the same. From the second composition series, we can deduce that $M_1$ is simple and $G/M_1$ is simple. By the [[Isomorphism Theorems#Second Isomorphism Theorem|Second Isomorphism Theorem]],  we have that $N_{r-1} \cap M_1 \unlhd M_1$ and the simplicity of $M_1$ then implies that $N_{r-1} \cap M = \{e\}$. (We assume that $N_r \neq M_1)$ Using the Second Isomorphism Theorem again, we can deduce that:
$$
G/M_1 \simeq N_{r-1} / (N_{r-1} \cap M_1) = N_{r-1}
$$
so $N_{r-1}$ is itself a simple group. Likewise, we can deduce that:
$$
G / N_{r-1} \simeq M_1 / (N_{r-1} \cap M_1) = M_1
$$
which shows that $1 \unlhd N_{r-1} \unlhd N_r = G$ is a composition series. Hence, $r = 2$ and we can explicitly see that the composition factors are permutations of each other. This completes the proof in the base case.  

For the Inductive Hypothesis, we assume that if $\min(r, s) < n$, then the composition factors in the two compositions series are in bijective correspondences. WLOG assume that $s < r$ and $s = n$. Using lemma $2$, we can deduce that there exists composition series of $N_{r-1}$ and $M_{s-1}$ that contains the normal subgroup $N_{r-1} \cap M_{s-1}$. Notice that in this case, we have: 
$$
G/M_{s-1} \simeq N_{r-1} / (N_{r-1} \cap M_{s-1})
$$
and the simplicity of $G / M_{s-1}$ shows that $N_{r-1} \cap M_{s-1}$ is the immediate predecessor pf $N_{r-1}$ in the composition series. Likewise, we may also deduce that $N_{r-1} \cap M_{s-1}$ is the immediate predecessor of $M_{r-1}$ in the composition series. We can then apply the inductive hypothesis to $N_{r - 1} \cap M_{s-1}$, which asserts that all composition factors of it are in bijective correspondence, to conclude that: 
$$
N_{r-1} \cap M_{s-1} = N_{r-2} = M_{s-2}
$$ and hence, $r = s$ and all composition factors of $G$ in the two composition series are permutations with each other. This completes the proof of the Jordan-Hölder Theorem. 

### Solvable Groups