---
aliases:
  - "[[Quotient Groups]]"
---
### Lagrange‘s Theorem

Lagrange's Theorem is one of the most elegant and important theorems in the theory of finite groups. It makes a direct linkage between the order of a group and all of its subgroups: 

>[!success] Lagrange's Theorem
>Let $G$ be a finite group and let $H \leq G$, then:
>$$
>|H| \mid |G|
>$$
>i.e. the order of any subgroup of $G$ divides the order of $G$. 

**Proof**: We proceed by using [[Quotient Groups#Cosets|Cosets]]. Denote the set of all left cosets of $H$ by $G / H$. We first show that all left cosets of $H$ have the same cardinality, i.e. $|H|$. For any two costs $gH, g'H \in G/H$, we define the map $f: gH \to g'H$ by $f(gh) = g'h$ for all $h \in H$, then clearly this is surjective and injectivity is guaranteed by right cancellation: $gh = g'h \implies h = h'$. Hence, $f$ is a bijection between any two left cosets of $H$, and consequently, all left cosets have the same Cardinality. From the note of [[Quotient Groups]], we have the result that all left cosets of $H$ partition $G$, so naturally:
$$
|G| = |H| |G/H| \implies  | H| \mid |G|
$$
where $|H|$ is the cardinality of each coset and $|G/H|$ is the total number of distinct cosets. This completes the poof of Lagrange's Theorem. 

In general, the number of distinct left (right) cosets is given a name: 

>[!d] Index of a Subgroup
>Let $G$ be a group and $H \leq G$, then the *index* of $H$ in $G$ is the number of distinct left (right) cosets of $H$ in $G$. This is denoted as $[G:H]$. 

>[!warning] Note
>* When $G$ is infinite, a subgroup of $G$ may still have a finite index. Examples of this include the set of all multiples of $n$ in $\mathbb{Z}$, denoted by $n\mathbb{Z}$: this subgroup has index $n$ in $\mathbb{Z}$. 
>* It is also worth noting that when $G$ is infinite, the $[G: H]$ is not necessarily $|G| / |H|$ as **Lagrange's Theorem only applies to finite groups**. 

---

With Lagrange's Theorem, we have the following easy corollaries: 

>[!success] The Index of Subgroups in Finite Groups
>Let $G$ be a finite group and $H\leq G$, then 
>$$
>[G: H] = \frac{|G|}{|H|}
>$$

**Proof**: Trivial. 

>[!success] Order of Elements Divide Order of Group
>Let $G$ be a finite group. For any $x \in G$, $o(x) \mid |G|$. Consequently:
>$$
>x^{|G|} = e
>$$

**Proof**: Consider the subgroup generated by $x$. From the [[Cyclic Groups]], we know that $o(x) = |\langle x \rangle|$, and by Lagrange's Theorem, $|\langle x \rangle| \mid |G|$, so consequently, $o(x) \mid |G|$. The second part of the proposition is then trivial. 

We can use this proposition to prove the following interesting result: 

>[!example] Subgroups of Finite Index in $\mathbb{Q}$
>$(\mathbb{Q}, +)$ contains no proper subgroups of finite order. 

**Proof**: Firstly, notice that $(\mathbb{Q}, +)$ is Abelian, so every subgroup is normal, which allows us to consider quotient groups. Suppose FTSOC that $H \leq \mathbb{Q}$ is a proper subgroup and $[\mathbb{Q}:H] = n$, then the quotient group $\mathbb{Q} / H$ is a finite group. Applying the above proposition shows that for any $qH \in \mathbb{Q} / H$, 
$$
(qH)^n = nqH = H
$$
As the cosets $qH$ partition $\mathbb{Q}$, this further implies that for all $x \in \mathbb{Q}$, $nx \in H$. However, notice that $n\mathbb{Q} = \{nq : n \in \mathbb{Z}, \; q \in \mathbb{Q}\} = \mathbb{Q}$, which is a contradiction. Hence, there exists no proper subgroups of finite index in $\mathbb{Q}$. 

>[!abstract] Key Idea
>When trying to prove that a group is **not finite**, we can use Lagrange's Theorem and it corollary on the order of elements to reach a contradiction. 

Using the same proposition, we may deduce *Fermat's Little Theorem* with no effort: 

>[!success] Fermat's Little Theorem
>For any $a \in \mathbb{Z}$ and prime $p \in \mathbb{Z}$:
>$$
>a^{p-1} \equiv 1 \; (\text{mod }p)
>$$

**Proof**: Consider the multiplicative group $\mathbb{Z} / p\mathbb{Z}^{\times}$. From Number Theory, we know that $|\mathbb{Z} / p\mathbb{Z}^{\times}| = p-1$, so naturally, for any $a \in \mathbb{Z}$: 
$$
[a]^{p-1} = [1]
$$
by the proposition proven above. Therefore, $a^{p-1} \equiv 1 \; (\text{mod }p)$ for all $a \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

Lagrange's Theorem also reveals the fact that if $p$ is a prime, then there is in fact **only one** group of order $p$ up to [[Homomorphisms and Isomorphisms|Isomorphism]]. 

>[!success] Groups of Prime Order
>Let $G$ be a finite group and suppose $|G| = p$, where $p \in \mathbb{Z}$ is a prime. Then, $G \simeq Z_p$, where $Z_p$ is the Cyclic Group of order $p$. 

**Proof**: For any $x \in G$, we must have $o(x) \mid p$ by the previously proven proposition. If $x \neq e$, then $o(x) \neq 1$. This forces the order of $x$ to be $p$. Consequently, any non-identity element in $G$ has order $p$, which each of them is a generator for $G$. Resultingly, $G$ must be isomorphism to the cyclic group of order $p$. 

This Proposition is also included in the [[Classification Theorems#Classificaiton of Groups of Prime Order|Classification Theorems]] Note. 

A key question in Group theory is regarding a converse of Lagrange's Theorem. Although the full converse of it is not true, there are many partial converses including [[Cauchy's Theorem]]
 and [[Sylow's Theorem]]. 
### Normal Subgroups: Applying Lagrange

We can utilise Lagrange's Theorem to simplify the computations to check whether a subgroup is normal, as shown in the following example: 

>[!example] A Normal Subgroup in $S_3$
>Consider the cyclic group generated by $(123)$ in $S_3$. Since the order of $(123)$ is $3$, $|\langle (123) \rangle | = 3$. We also know that $N_{S_3}(\langle (123) \rangle) \leq \langle (123) \rangle \leq S_3$, so by Lagrange's Theorem, the order of the normalizer must divide $3$ and meanwhile be divisible by $6$. Let $\langle (123) \rangle = H$, then the only possibilities for the Normalizer are $N_{S_3}(H) = H$ or $S_3$. Now, simply notice that: 
>$$
>(12)(123)(12)^{-1} = (12)(123)(12) = (132) = (123)^{-1} \in S_3
>$$ 
>so the normalizer contains an element in $S_3 - H$, meaning that $N_{S_3}(H) = S_3$, which implies that $H \unlhd S_3$. 

This example can in fact be extended to the following proposition: 

>[!success] Subgroups of Index $2$ are Normal
>Let $G$ be a group (**not necessarily finite**) and $H \leq G$ with $[G:H] = 2$. Then, $H \unlhd G$. 
>

**Proof**: It suffices to show that $gH = Hg$ for all $g \in G$, i.e. every left coset of $H$ are equal to the corresponding right coset. As the index of $H$ is $2$, the left cosets of $H$ are $H$ and $gH$ for any $g \not \in H$. As the cosets partition $G$, we can deduce that $gH = G - H$. Likewise, the right cosets of $H$ are $H$ and $Hg$, and conseuqently:
$$
gH = G - H = Hg
$$
which implies that the left cosets are exactly the right cosets. As a result, $H \unlhd G$. 

>[!abstract] Key Idea
>When proving that a subgroup is normal, is it more convenient to consider the **Normalizer** and apply Lagrange's Theorem when the group is finite. On the other hand, when the group if infinite, it is useful to consider the **left and right cosets** of the subgroup and prove that they are exactly equal. 

### Products of Subgroups

In this section, we investigate another way of formulating a new group from two subgroups: the *product* of subgroups

>[!d] Product of Subgroups
>Let $G$ be a group and $H, K \leq G$, then the *product* of $H$ and $K$, denoted by $HK$ is the set:
>$$
>HK = \{ hk : h \in H, \; k \in K \}
>$$

The very first question we want to ask about this new object is: what is its cardinality? How is it linked to the order of $G$ and $H$? The following proposition provides an elegant answer: 

>[!success] Cardinality of Product
>Let $G$ be a finite group, and $H, K \leq G$, then:
>$$
>|HK| = \frac{|H||K|} {|H \cap K|}
>$$

**Proof**: It suffices to prove that:
$$
\frac{|HK|}{|K|} = \frac{|H|}{|H\cap K|}
$$
and notice that $|HK|/|K|$ is precisely the number of left cosets of $K$ in $HK$, and $|H|/|H\cap K|$ is the number of left cosets of $H\cap K$ in $H$. Hence, we aim to find a bijection between the two sets of cosets. Firstly, observe that for any $hk \in HK$, $hkK = hK$ since multiplication by $k$ simply permutes the elements of $K$ (this is an [[Group Actions|action]] on K), i.e. the cosets of $K$ in $HK$ are precisely te cosets of $K$ in $H$. Next, define $f: H/K \to H/(H \cap K)$ by $f(hK) = h(H \cap K)$. Clearly, this is a surjection and we can deduce that it is an injection as follows: 
$$
hK = h'K \iff h^{-1}h' \in K \iff h^{-1}h' \in H\cap K \iff h(H\cap K) = h'(H \cap K)
$$
Hence, $f$ is a bijection between the set of left cosets of $K$ in $HK$ and the set of left cosets of $H\cap K$ in $H$, which shows that the two sets have the same cardinality, completing the proof. 

>[!warning] Remark
>This formula is also a consequence of the [[Isomorphism Theorems|Second Isomorphism Theorem]] which states that:
>$$
>HK/K \simeq H/(H\cap K)
>$$
>where $HK$ is a group, and $H, K \unlhd G$. 

Notice that when describing $|HK|$, we used "cardinality" in place of "order". This is because the product of subgroups $HK$ is **not always a subgroup** itself. In fact, we have the following necessary and sufficient condition for it to be a subgroup: 

>[!success] Criteria for $HK$ to be a Subgroup
>Let $G$ be a group and $H, K\leq G$, then $HK \leq G$ if and only if $HK = KH$. 

**Proof**: Suppose $HK = KH$, we prove that $HK \leq G$ using the [[Subgroups#Properties of Subgroups|Subgroup Criteria]]. Let $h_1k_1, h_2k_2 \in HK$, then since $HK = KH$, there exists $h\in H$ and $k \in K$ such that $(k_1k_2^{-1})h_2^{-1} = hk$. Consequently: 
$$
(h_1k_1)(h_2k_2)^{-1} = h_1(k_1k_2^{-1})h_2^{-1} = h_1hk \in HK
$$
Hence, $HK \leq G$. Conversely, if $HK \leq G$, then for all $h \in H, k \in K$:
$$
kh = (ek)(he)
$$
As $ek, he \in HK$, we have that $kh \in HK$ by closure under multiplication, so $KH \subseteq HK$. For the opposite inclusion take any $hk \in HK$ and let $a^{-1} = hk$. As $HK$ is a group, there exists $h_1, k_!$ such that $a = h_1k_1\in HK$. Thus: 
$$
hk = (h_1k_1)^{-1} = k_1^{-1}h_1^{-1} \in KH
$$
showing that $HK \subseteq KH$. Hence, if $HK \leq G$, then $HK = KH$. 

>[!abstract] Key Idea
>When we want to prove this type of commutativity property for groups, it is common to consider the **inverse of a product**. This same idea can be used to prove that if every element in a group has order $2$, then this group must be abelian. (See [[Definition and Elementary Properties of Groups#Relevent Definitions]])

A weaker formulation of this necessary and condition relationship reveals the relationship between the product and the normalizer:

>[!success] Normalizer Criteria for $HK$ to be a Subgroup
>Let $G$ be a group and $H, K \leq G$. If $H \leq N_G(K)$, then $HK$ is a subgroup. As a special case, if $H \unlhd G$, then $HK \leq G$. 

**Proof**: It suffices to prove that $HK = KH$. Since $H \leq N_G(K)$, for any $hk \in HK$, $hkh^{-1} = k' \in K$, which implies that $hk = k'h \in KH$. Hence, $HK \subseteq KH$. Likewise, we can prove that $KH \subseteq HK$, which completes the proof by the previous proposition.

Chan



