---
aliases:
  - "[[The Symmetric Group]]"
  - "[[Homomorphisms and Isomorphisms]]"
  - "[[Quotient Groups]]"
---
### Generators of $S_n$

In this section, we expand the properties of the symmetric group $S_n$ introduced in the note [[The Symmetric Group]]. Firstly, we shall be loonking for a [[Subgroups Generated by Subsets|Generating Set]] of $S_n$ to simplify our works later. We already know that any permutation in $S_n$ can be written as **distinct cycles**, and with the development of more tools, we will be able to prove that for each permutation, this decomposition is unique. Naturally, this tells us that $S_n$ can be generated by the set of all cycles in $S_n$, but can we find a simpler generating set than even this? Notice that for a cycle $(a_1a_2...a_n)$, it can be further decomposed into: 
$$
(a_1a_2...a_n) = (a_1a_2)(a_1a_3)...(a_1a_n)
$$
Visually, the product of *transpositions* on the RHS are doing the following sequence of operations: 
$$
(a_1, a_2, ..., a_n) \to (a_n, a_2, ..., a_1) \to (a_n, a_2, ..., a_1, a_{n-1})
 \to ... \to (a_n, a_1, ..., a_{n-1}) $$
 which gives the same result as the simple permutation $(a_1a_2...a_n)$. Using this method, we can decompose any $n$-cycle into a product of transpotitions: 
 
>[!d] Transpositions
>A *Transposition* in $S_n$ is a $2$-cycle. 

We have hence proved the following proposition:

>[!success] Transpositions generate $S_n$
>Let $S$ denote the set of all transpositions in $S_n$, i.e.
>$$
>S = \{(ij) : 1 \leq i \neq j \leq n\}
>$$
>Then, $S_n = \langle S \rangle$. 

>[!warning] Note
>As an interesting deviation, this proposition allows us to prove the *generalized commutativity* from the basic commutativity of $2$ elements, because essentially the proposition is saying that we can permute $n$ elements in all possible ways by repeatedly swapping two elements each time. 

The set of all transpositions is not the only generating subset of $S_n$, in fact, we have an even simpler generating subset of $S_n$ as shown below: 

>[!success] Two Elements that Generate $S_n$
>$S_n = \langle (12), (12...n)\rangle$ for all $n \geq 2$. 

**Proof**: First, we show that:
$$
S_n = \langle (i, i+1) | 1 \leq i \leq n-1 \rangle
$$
This can be proved simply by noticing that any transposition $(ij)$ (Assume WLOG that $j > i$) can be written as: 
$$
(ij) = (i, i+1) (i+1, i+2)...(j-1, j-2)(j-1, j) (j-1, j-2), ..., (i+1, i+2)(i, i+1)
$$
To justify this, notice that the transpositions up to and including $(j-1, j)$ have moved element $j$ to the position of $i$, and the rest of the transpositions moved element $i$ to the position of $j$. All other elements are unchanged throughout. Hence, with the previous proposition, we can see that $S_n$ can be generated by **transpositions of adjacent elements**. This statement itself is a stengthened version of the previous proposition. 

Using the fact proven above, we can show that $S_n = \langle (12), (12...n) \rangle$. It suffices to prove that every transposition of adjacent elements can be expressed as a sequence of product of the two elements. Again, we can simply notice that the transposition $(i, i+1)$ can be written as:
$$
(i, i+1) = (12...n)^{i-1}(12)(12...n)^{-i+1}
$$
This can be verified by looking at where $i$ and $i+1$ are mapped to. When $(12...n)^{-i+1}$ is applied, $i$ gets mapped to $1$ and $i+1$ gets mapped to position $2$. After the transposition $(12)$, $i$ will be mapped to$2$ and $i+1$ will be mapped to $1$. Then, the final cycle maps $1$ to $i$ and likewise, $2$ is mapped to $i+1$. Hence, this is equivent to the transposition of $i$ and $i+1$ and completes the proof of the proposition.  

### Sign of Permutations


### The Alternating Groups $A_n$


